(GH-2492) Add dedicated Hiera docs (#2632)
puppetlabs/bolt: documentation/hiera.md

# Using Bolt with Hiera

Because Bolt uses Puppet as a library, it has access to Hiera. Hiera is a

> built-in key-value configuration data lookup system, which lets you seperate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
built-in key-value configuration data lookup system, which lets you separate
```

> data from your code. There are some key differences to how Bolt and Puppet use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
data from your code. There are some key differences in how Bolt and Puppet use
```

Hiera, which this page covers in more detail.

Before you start using Hiera in Bolt, get familiar with [how to use
Hiera](https://puppet.com/docs/puppet/latest/hiera_intro.html).

## Hiera configuration layers

> In Bolt, Hiera uses two independent layers of configuration when you look up
> data. This is different from Puppet, where Hiera has three independent layers of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Bolt, Hiera uses two independent layers of configuration when you look up
data: the project layer and the module layer. This is different from Puppet, where 
Hiera has three independent layers of
```

> where Hiera has three independent layers of configuration. Bolt seraches the two

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
where Hiera has three independent layers of configuration. Bolt searches the two
```

> configuration. The two layers of configuration are searched in the following
> order: project → module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
configuration. Bolt searches the two layers of configuration in the following
order: project → module.
```

> layers of configuration in the order: project → module.

Reviewer 2: The arrow! I love.

> layers of configuration in the following order: project → module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
layers of configuration in the order: project → module.
```

### Project layer

The configuration file for the project layer is located, by default, at
`<PROJECT>/hiera.yaml`.

The project layer is equivalent to the environment layer in Puppet. This is

> where you define most of your Hiera data hierarchy. Every project has its own

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where you define most of your Hiera data hierarchy. Every project has a
```

hierarchy configuration, which applies to all look ups made from that project.

You can specify a different configuration file for the project layer by setting

> the `hiera-config` option in your project configuration, or by setting the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the `hiera-config` option in your project configuration, or by using the
```

`--hiera-config` command-line option.

📖  **Related information**

- [bolt-project.yaml options](bolt_project_reference.md#hiera-config)
- [*nix shell commands](bolt_command_reference.md)
- [PowerShell cmdlets](bolt_cmdlet_reference.md)

### Module layer

The configuration for a module layer is located, by default, in the module's
root directory at `<MODULE>/hiera.yaml`.

The module layer sets default values and merge behavior for a module’s class

> parameters. It comes last in Hiera’s lookup order, so environment data set by a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
parameters. The module layer comes last in Hiera’s lookup order, so environment data set by a
```

data set by a user overrides the default data set by the module’s author.

> ## Look up data from the command line

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Look up data from the command-line
```
It actually seems like we use both pretty interchangeably throughout the docs, but at least being consistent within each page/section seems reasonable ;P

Author: We use 'command line' when referring to the command line itself, but hyphenate as 'command-line' when referring to the options.

> If you have used Puppet, you may be familiar with the [`puppet lookup`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have used Puppet, you might be familiar with the [`puppet lookup`
```

command](https://puppet.com/docs/puppet/latest/hiera_automatic.html#using_puppet_lookup),
which is the command-line interface for the `lookup()` function. Bolt does not
have an equivalent command-line interface, so it is not possible to look up data

> with Hiera outside of running your code in Bolt.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
with Hiera outside of a Bolt plan.
```

## Look up data in plans

You can use the [Puppet `lookup()`
function](https://puppet.com/docs/puppet/latest/hiera_automatic.html#puppet_lookup)
in plans to look up data. It's useful to think of looking up Hiera data in Bolt
plans in two different contexts: [inside apply
blocks](applying_manifest_code.md) and outside apply blocks.

### Inside apply blocks

Inside apply blocks, Bolt compiles Puppet catalogs in a per-target context, and
has unfettered access to Hiera data. You can use the same Hiera configuration

> and data you would for Puppet, and look up data as you would expect inside apply
> blocks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and data you would for Puppet, and look up data in the same way as you would in Puppet.
```

Before executing an apply block in a plan, you typically run the `apply_prep()`
function on all of the targets that you run the apply on. As part of the

> `apply_prep()` function, Bolt will collect facts for each target and set them

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`apply_prep()` function, Bolt collects facts for each target and sets them
```

> on the target. When Bolt compiles Puppet catalogs for each of these targets, the
> context will include the target's facts, which you can use in interpolations in
> your Hiera configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
on the target. When Bolt compiles Puppet catalogs for each of these targets, the
context includes the target's facts, which you can use in interpolations in
your Hiera configuration.
```

> Given the following Hiera configuration at `<PROJECT>/hiera.yaml`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Given the following Hiera configuration at `<PROJECT DIRECTORY>/hiera.yaml`:
```
I know we had a PR a few months ago to standardize on this for Projects, but I'm not sure @hestonhoffman which is preferable? I don't feel strongly either way - `PROJECT` is shorter, so all things being equal I'd go that way, but we'd want to update everything else to match.

```yaml
# hiera.yaml
version: 5

hierarchy:
  - name: "Per-OS defaults"
    path: "os/%{facts.os.family}.yaml"
  - name: "Common data"
    path: "common.yaml"
```

And the following data source at `<PROJECT>/data/os/windows.yaml`:

```yaml
# data/os/windows.yaml
confpath: "C:\Program Files\Common Files\my_tool.conf"
```

And the following plan at `<PROJECT>/plans/configure.pp`:

```puppet
# plans/configure.pp
plan my_project::configure (
  TargetSpec $targets
) {
  $targets.apply_prep

  $apply_result = apply($targets) {
    file { lookup('confpath'):
      ensure  => file,
      content => 'setting: false'
    }
  }

  return $apply_result
}
```

> Because the apply block includes a `lookup()`, the following steps will
> take place when running the plan:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because the apply block includes a `lookup()`, Hiera performs 
the following steps during the plan run:
```

1. Hiera checks the `facts.os.family` fact for the target, since the first
   level of the hierarchy includes an interpolation for this fact.
1. Hiera looks for the `confpath` key in the appropriate data source. If the
   target's OS is Windows, it checks `<PROJECT>/data/os/windows.yaml`.
1. Hiera finds the `confpath` key in the data source and returns the value
   `C:\Program Files\Common Files\my_tool.conf` from the `lookup()` function.
   

> After looking up the `confpath` key, the code that is used to compile the Puppet
> catalog for the target would be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After looking up the `confpath` key, Bolt uses this code to compile the Puppet
catalog for the target:
```
I'm not sure whether it's Bolt or Hiera performing the action here.

```puppet
file { 'C:\Program Files\Common Files\my_tool.conf':
  ensure  => file,
  content => 'setting: false'
}
```

### Outside apply blocks

Outside apply blocks, Bolt is essentially executing a script. It doesn't have a
concept of a target or context, and thus cannot load per-target data. This
breaks common Hiera features like interpolating target facts.

Given the following Hiera configuration at `<PROJECT>/hiera.yaml`:

```yaml
# hiera.yaml
version: 5

hierarchy:
  - name: "Per-target data"
    path: "targets/%{trusted.certname}.yaml"
  - name: "Common data"
    path: "common.yaml"
```

And the following plan at `<PROJECT>/plans/request.pp`:

```puppet
# plans/request.pp
plan my_project::request (
  TargetSpec $targets
) {
  $api_key = lookup('api_key')
  $result  = run_task('make_request', $targets, 'api_key' => $api_key)

  return $result
}
```

> Running the plan will result in an error like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Running the plan results in an error like this:
```

key using the `plan_hierarchy`, which does not include interpolations.

By specifying both keys in the same Hiera configuration, you can look up data
inside and outside apply blocks in the same plan. This allows you to use your
existing Hiera configuration in Bolt plans without encountering an error if
per-target interpolations exist and your plan tries to look up data outside an
apply block.

### Interpolations outside apply blocks

Interpolations are not well supported in the `plan_hierarchy` hierarchy. Target
level data such as facts are not available to lookups outside of apply blocks,
so the normal hierarchy interpolation does not work. The `lookup()` function
only interpolates based on the variables currently in scope.

The following example demonstrates interpolating the `$application` variable
into a `plan_hierarchy` hierarchy:

Given the following configuration at `<PROJECT>/hiera.yaml`:

```yaml
# hiera.yaml
version: 5

plan_hierarchy:
  - name: "Application data"
    path: "%{application}.yaml"
```

And the following data source at `<PROJECT DIRECTORY>/data/kittycats.yaml`:

```yaml
# data/kittycats.yaml
site_path: /var/www/kittycats.tld/public_html
```

> And the following data source at `<PROJECT DIRECTORY/data/doggos.yaml`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And the following data source at `<PROJECT DIRECTORY>/data/doggos.yaml`:
```
